Welcome to the 3D Cursor
and Origins! So in this video we're going to take another
look at our reference pieces, and we're going to look for some commonality,
to save us time with our modeling. And finally, we're going
to use the 3D Cursor and the Origin, associated
with an object, to accurately control our piece.
So let's go back to our chosen dimensions that we
had a look at earlier! And we've already done our pawn, and that's 3 centimeters, the base
is well 3 Blender units, in this case. Now, all the other
pieces, bar the king, have a 4 centimeter base,
and that's what we've picked. And that is a 1/3 larger, again, it's
33% larger. So when we go and scale in a bit, we will need to scale by
1.333333, etc. And I'm not quite
sure how many 3's we're going to need, we can have a look anyway and see as we go!
So let's hop on over to my file system,
where we can have another look at our pieces!
So looking at our pieces, we can see that the bishop
itself and the king and the
pawn and the queen have a very similar neck line,
all up to this bit along the top. So just beneath the ball
on here, we've got this little plate it sits on. Now, I'm pretty
certain that if we grabbed the bishop's head and replaced it
with a ball well it would look pretty similar, you wouldn't be able to distinguish
between the two unless you saw them in situation, and the same
with the king. So I think we can use our pawn
base, all the way up to this top bit of the neck here,
and then, build upon that to make the rest of our pieces.
Now that's done! We just archived away our pawn, but we can go and retrieve it and
start using it to make the rest of our model.
The exception to this, of course,
is the knight itself, which is geometrically, completely, different from the
rest of the pieces, apart from its base, and the rook itself,
which has sort of no top to it. It's got these castlements
on top. So, let's hop straight on over into blender
OK, so now we're in Blender! I've just opened it up afresh,
and fortunately, my Low Poly Pawn is still in my recent files, so I'm
happy to go open that there! If yours isn't, go to your project folder in your archive
folder, because we just archived it. Feel free to pull it back out into the working folder,
if you want. I'm just going to open it up, because we're going to save it in a few moments,
as the new pieces. So I'm going to go straight over to our
Outliner and change this to Bishop,
and I'm going to go to File, Save As,
and name it appropriately. So in this
case, I'm going to put it in the current working folder and call it Low Poly Bishop or LP
Bishop, in my case, and Save As Blender File. So
I'm just going to amend this here and also put LP Bishop in the
Outliner, just so it's really descriptive as what we're working on. This obviously
is not a bishop, at the moment, we need to do a couple of things. So
looking at the reference material there, we need to scale
this up slightly. So I'm going to do that straight away, I'm just going to hit the S button, and we know
that we need to scale it up by 1.333 reoccurring.
So let's have a look over here in the Properties Pane, if
it's not open, open yours up with the N Key or the little +.
And we have Dimensions here, and we can see X and Y are at 3,
which is perfect because we want them at 4.
So we could go and type in 4 there, to be quite honest, 4
and 4, and it looks a bit squat but that's fine! But if
we wanted to scale the whole lot at once, we'd have to work it, so let's
undo that. We'd have to work out what this, multiplied by 1.3 is, and
I really don't want to grab a calculator, at the moment. So I'm just going to scale up
and go 1.3, and we can see that that
produces 3.9. If we do another 3, it's 3.99, 3.999,
and if we do to four decimal places, it's pretty
much bang on 4, as far as Blender is concerned. Now, we've got
a little problem here, because it's pushed it through the floor here!
So we need to do a bit of jiggery pokery, to try and get this
back onto the floor plane itself, so where Z
equals 0. We can do that in a couple of ways! If you knew exactly
the mathematics required you could adjust the Z,
up here in the Transform, to be something other than 1, so it'd be something greater
than 1, but that is the position of the origin of this
object. So one of the things we could do is
move the origin to the base of our
pawn, in this case, but soon to be bishop. So there are a couple of ways of
doing that, but one of the easiest ways to do it is to get
the 3D Cursor, this thing here that you use with Left Mouse Button,
and then, set the origin to it. So in the
Tool Shelf, whilst in Object Mode, if we put the
cursor over here and then go to where it says Set Origin and
go Origin to 3D Cursor,
it moves the origin to the 3D Cursor. Now, this is
important, because this is used in so many factors including
how it scales. So it's going to scale in and out towards that,
it's also going to rotate around that, so it acts as a pivot point,
as well. So that allows us to have lots of control! Now, having it all the way
out there, in this case, isn't going to benefit us,
and later on, when we start playing with physics
modeling, this will be the object's center of mass.
More on that later one! Now, we need to just move
it somewhere a bit more useful for us and that's the base of this pawn
or bishop, as it will soon be.
So one of the things you can do here is literally
start clicking on our object, and if we rotate around
after you've clicked, you'll see that where you've clicked it
kind of attaches itself to the face that you've clicked on. It's
semi-intelligent, in that manner, so it works with us!
And fortunately for us, we've got a big flat base on the
bottom of our object here. So if we click on
that, anywhere on that, that is actually perfectly on
that face.
The other thing that we can do with the 3D Cursor is actually
tell it where to go instead. So for instance, in
Edit Mode, if we select a particular point, edge
or vertex, so if we select this vertex here, for instance
this one here, we can then use the shortcut keys Shift
plus S and that opens up this
snapping menu for our 3D Cursor. When we do
that, we can actually move the Cursor to the Selected, so we've popped
the 3D Cursor smack bang on that vertex there.
If we had an edge selected and we did the same
thing, Shift S, and then, Cursor to Selected, it will go into the middle
of that edge. And if we had a face selected, well you
probably guessed it already, when we go to snap it with Shift and
S, we can move Cursor to Selected and it appears in the
middle of our face. So
the final thing you can do is set this 3D Cursor back to 0, 0, 0,
which is right in the middle of our
model. Well not this particular model but in the middle of the scene where X, Y, and Z all
equal 0. Now, you can do that in the
Properties section over here.
We scroll down, we've got our 3D Cursor position, it's location,
and the shortcut, we can go into there and set them all to 0,
but the shortcut is Shift and S. And then finally, Cursor
to Center, and that will pop it where X,
Y, and Z all equal 0.
It's challenge time! OK guys, I'd like you to place the bishop
on the ground. So I say ground, in inverted comments, but what I mean is so the
bishop is actually where Z equals 0, so nothing is protruding
beneath that grid. So I'd like you to scale the bishop's
base to 4 Blender units in diameter, if you've not done it already. Then,
set the origin to the base of the bishop.
Then, set the base of our bishop to Z equals
0. And there's extra credit, it's not necessary, but extra
credit if you set the bishop's origin to (0,0,0).
So that means that our bishop is really square in the scene!
Pause the video now and give that a go! OK
guys, welcome back! Let's hop straight on over into Blender!
OK, so let's go about moving all of this stuff of
this ground plane! So let's move around and just
click on the base. So that is definitely on the base there, and then, we
need to go into Object Mode. I'm not in Object Mode, at the moment, because
the origin is changed there. So set the origin to the
cursor, Origin to 3D Cursor. Brilliant! So now, we
have it on the base, over in the Properties Pane,
we can see that Z equals -2.5.
So if we set that to 0, it will lift that up to the
right place, which is brilliant! That's now sitting on the ground!
So the next thing we need to do is just move
the origin to the center. So as we can see there, it's not
quite there,
the object is but the origin is not, so let's move the origin now
to the center. So what we need to do, we're going to move the
3D Cursor first, so Shift and S, Cursor to
Center. Now that the cursor is in the center, we can then again
go Set Origin to the 3D Cursor, and let's move that
back to there. So now, the origin of our model is smack bang
on the bottom, which in this case is great!
Excellent! How did you guys get on?
Please share your progress
in the discussions, and I will see you in the next lecture!